_Author: Maurice Snoeren_

# Hashing
You already know hash functions from Java programming. HashMaps uses hash functions to create a hash table to store the data. Do you recall? Using the hash function the memory location of the value based on the key can be found very fast. So, a hash function takes a collection of data and transfers it to a smaller finite set of data. It is therefore a one-way function. You can create a hash value from the key, but you cannot derive the key from the hash value.

# Secure hashing
Secure hashing is similar, however there are some differences to make a hash secure. The hash used to create assiociative array does not provide any means of security. A secure hash is also a one-way function. Meaning that the input can be transformed into a secure hash, but a secure hash cannot be transformed to the input again. The following requirements have to be met to create a good secure hash function:
- Calculation of the hash value must be fast.
- The hash value is always the same for the same input.
- Minor changes in the input shall result into a very different hash value.
- It shall not be possible to calculate the same hash value for a given input with minor changes (or meaningfull changes), otherwise it is considered as broken.

A secure hash function is able to take an infinite input and transfer it to a fixed hash value, like a 256 bit or 512 bit value. You could think about a secure hash function that it creates a fingerprint for your piece of data.

# Usage of secure hashes
The usage of hashes is very broad. Even git uses secure hashes to create integrity within the repository. Some examples are
- Integrity checking
- Signing
- Tokens
- Key derivation
- Blockchain chaining of blocks
- Blockchain proof-of-work
- NFT's

# Secure hash algorithms
The are a lot of different secure hash algorithms. Please use hash functions that are not broken in your applications. Some examples are


|Algorithm|Date|Bits|Broken|
|---|---|---|---|
|MD5|1991|128|Yes|
|SHA-1|1993|160|Yes|
|RIPEMD-160|1996|160|No|
|Whirlpool|2000|512|No|
|SHA-2|2001|SHA-512, SHA-384, SHA-256 and SHA-224|No|
|SHA-3|2015|SHA-512, SHA-384, SHA-256 and SHA-224|No|

# Salting
A very common use is storing the hashes of the passwords of the user. So, no plaintext is stored, but the hashes version. If the database is compromised, the passwords cannot be immediatly used. When attackers want to retrieve the password, they need to brute-force a lot of passwords to find the same hash. If you have a very strong password, this will take centuries.

However, attackers create rainbow tables. These tables contain plaintext passwords and the according hash value. Hashes can be easily looked up and your password is exposed. While the hash function will create exactly the same hash value with the same input, you should never use the plain hash function, but use a random salt. Salting is the method that you add random information to the password and create the hash with this combination. If users have the same password, due to this random value, the secure hashes will be different. Offcourse, you need also to store the salt, otherwise you cannot check it.

But ... even with a salt brute-force attacks are possible and therefore it is recommended to use special hashes called key derivation functions (KDF). These functions create a secure hash from a password. Some algorithms that can be used are:
- PDKDF2
- bcrypt
- scrypt
- argon2
- Balloon

# Try it yourself online
You can try online to see how the secure hash changes based on the input. Try to make a small change and see the output. Look to different algorithms. Good luck!
- https://emn178.github.io/online-tools/sha256.html
- https://guggero.github.io/blockchain-demo/#!/hash
